# Sound Waves
The communications medium we first experience is sound. When we experience sound, our ears interpret the varying pressure of compressions waves as they travel through the air. When you hear a perfect, pure tone (for example a tuning fork) this is a sine wave. These waves occur naturally in range of different circumstances, for example, ocean waves, light, the bell tone of a guitar string.

The lowest sounds we normally hear are the hum which is associated with electrical equipment plugged into the mains electricity. This is caused by the mains voltage varying at around fifty times per second. Variations or cycles per second are given the unit of hertz (Hz) and are a measurement of frequency, so 50 cycles per second is referred to as 50 Hz. Most people can hear sounds even lower than this, perhaps down to 20 Hz. Frequency is normally designated by the letter f.

The speed of sound in air at sea-level is about 300ms<sup>-1</sup> (V).

If a sound wave of 50 Hz passed you by at 300ms<sup>-1</sup> then the distance between the peak of each wave would be 300/50 = 6m. This would be the wavelength which is normally designated by the Greek letter lambda (λ).

To convert between wavelength and frequency, we need to know the speed the sound wave is travelling at.

_Wavelength=(Velocity of Wave)/Frequency or λ=V/F_

A sound signal can be loud or quiet. We use the term amplitude to describe how “big” the signal is. The highest frequency you can hear depends on your age, but a young person may hear sounds up to 20 kHz or twenty thousand hertz.

As you get older, your ability to hear high frequencies diminishes and thrash metal bands just don’t sound the same anymore.